.TH QDELIVER 1

.SH NAME
qdeliver \- deliver qmail messages according to webdav instruction list

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qdeliver
[\fB--db\fP \fIuserdb\fP]
[\fB--handler\fP \fIhandler-script\fP]
[\fB--notify\fP \fInotify-script\fP]
\fIlocalpart\fP
\fIdomain\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBqdeliver\fP is a qmail local delivery program that takes instructions from files on a webdav server rather than from local \fB.qmail\fP files.

A list of instructions is downloaded from a webdav server, then each instruction is passed to \fIhandler-script\fP.
The default handler scripts has instructions such as "forward, "bounce" and "drop".

\fIlocalpart\fP and \fIdomain\fP are used to lookup webdav login details in \fIuserdb\fP.
The first "-" delimited token in \fIlocalpart\fP is used as the owner in \fIuserdb\fP.

\fIlocalpart\fP is also used to find the webdav file corresponding to the delivery address.
If there is a file named \fIlocalpart\fP.txt in the webdav directory named in \fIuserdb\fP, then it is downloaded and used as the list of instructions.
If there is no matching file, but there is a file named \fBdefault\fP.txt, then \fBdefault\fP.txt is copied to \fIlocalpart\fP.txt and its instructions are followed.

.SS userdb
The \fIuserdb\fP file holds webdav login details for \fIowner\fP-\fIdomain\fP combinations.
It is a JSON file that looks like this:

.ft C
.in +3
.nf
{
    "version": 1,
    "accounts": [
        {
            "owner": "joe",
            "domain": "example.com",
            "url": "http://webdav.example.com/example.com",
            "login": "joe",
            "password": "joeswebdavpassword",
            "notify": true
        }
    ]
}
.fi
.in -3
.ft P

Any number of of \fBaccounts\fP elements may be included.
\fBqdeliver\fP will match on \fBowner\fP and \fBdomain\fP.

\fBlogin\fP and \fBpassword\fP are used to login to the webdav server.
Only HTTP Basic Authentication is supported.

A file named \fIlocalpart\fP.txt will be retrieved from the server and directory named in \fIurl\fP.

\fBnotify\fP is optional, and defaults to false.
If true, owner@domain will be sent a notification email whenever a new \fIlocalpart\fP.txt file is created.

.SS Delivery Instructions

The file downloaded from webdav should be a text file with one instruction per line.
Empty lines and lines starting with # are ignored.
Instructions are executed one at a time in order.
Standard qmail local command exit values are respected.

Each line is tokenized and passed to \fIhandler-script\fP exactly.
Apart from escaping and quoting, no processing is done.
Specifically, it is not possible to refer to environment variables or to invoke any local operating system commands.

.SS handler-script

The handler script executes instructions in the file downloaded from the webdav server.
It will be called for every line in the instruction file.
Its arguments are exactly as stated in the instruction file, with quoting removed.
For example, if a line in the instruction file is \fBforward joe@example.com\fP, then \fB$1\fP in the handler script is \fBforward\fP and \fB$2\fP is \fBjoe@example.com\fP.

Lines can be delimited by \fB\\n\fP, \fB\\r\fP, or \fB\\r\\n\fP.
Lines starting with \fB#\fP and lines consisting of only whitespace are ignored.

Tokens in lines are whitespace delimited.
Single and double quotes, and \\-escapes can be used to escape whitespace or special characters.
\\-escapes cause the next character to be treated as not special, and can be used outside quoted strings, and within double-quoted strings.
There is no escaping in single-quoted strings.

\fBscripts/qdeliver-handler.sh\fP is an example handler script.

.SS notify-script

When a new address file is created, and the userdb entry for Notify is true, then \fInotify-script\fP will be called with two arguments: the recipient of the notification message, and the new address that was just created.
If \fInotify-script\fP fails, message may be logged, but nothing else happens; ordinary mail delivery is not impacted.

\fBscripts/qdeliver-notify.sh\fP is an example notify script.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB--db\fP \fIuserdb\fP
Path to userdb.
Defaults to \fB./users.json\fP.

.TP
\fB--handler\fP \fIhandler-script\fP
Path to executable handler.
Defaults to \fB./qdeliver-handler.sh\fP.

.TP
\fB--notify\fP \fInotify-script\fP
Path to notification script.
Defaults to \fB./qdeliver-notify.sh\fP.

.SH EXIT STATUS

\fBqdeliver\fP conforms to the \fBqmail-local(8)\fP conventions to the extent possible: 0 for success, 111 temporary error, 100 permanent error, and so on.
It is possible that something executed by the handler script may exit with other values.
Be careful when setting up the handler script.

.SH EXAMPLE

If \fBvirtualdomains\fP says:

.ft C
.in +3
.nf
example.com:example
.fi
.in -3
.ft P

then you could put this in \fB~alias/.qmail-example-default\fP:

.ft C
.in +3
.nf
|/path/to/qdeliver "$EXT2" "$HOST"
.fi
.in -3
.ft P

.SH SEE ALSO

qmail-local(8), fastforward(1)